# Day 20 of 100DaysofCode

Feeling excited to start Day 20 of 100 DaysOfCode, today, I learnt about NPM full course for beginners (Part-2) in a great Video by [Codedamn](https://youtu.be/cjoTTSbOuG0?si=wuQHLd8x--mETWsh).The topics I covered today are packages.jso, package-lock.json, types of dependencies(dev and peer), NPM scripts and all about NPX. 

## Usage

Clone this repository or simply refer to the README for a quick reference on using the NPM commands. Feel free to customize the commands based on your needs.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Pravesh-Sudha/100-Days-Of-Code.git
cd day-20
```

## What is Package.json and Package-lock.json?

`package-lock.json` and `package.json` are both important files in Node.js projects, especially when managing dependencies. They serve different purposes and work together to ensure consistency and reliability in your project.

- package.json:
    
    - `package.json` is a metadata file for your Node.js project. It contains various information about your project, such as its name, version, description, author, and most importantly, a list of its dependencies.

    - The dependencies section in package.json lists the packages (dependencies) your project relies on. These dependencies are typically libraries or modules that your code uses to perform various tasks.

    - The package.json file allows you to specify the minimum and maximum versions of each dependency your project can use, which helps ensure that your project is consistent and works on different environments.
    Example package.json snippet:

    ```bash
    {
  "name": "my-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "My Node.js project",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.17.1",
    "lodash": "^4.17.21"
     }
    }
    ```

- package-lock.json:

    - `package-lock.json` is a more recently introduced file (as of npm 5) that is automatically generated by npm when you install or update dependencies.

    - It serves as a detailed, machine-readable record of the exact versions of all dependencies and sub-dependencies your project uses.

    - This file ensures that every time you or someone else installs dependencies for your project, the exact same versions are installed. It helps prevent the "dependency hell" problem where different developers might end up with slightly different versions of dependencies, potentially leading to compatibility issues.

    - package-lock.json also includes additional information such as checksums to verify the integrity of downloaded packages.

    - Example package-lock.json snippet (simplified for clarity):
    
    ```bash
    {
  "name": "my-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": {
      "version": "4.17.1",
      "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/express/-/express-4.17.1.tgz",
      "integrity": "sha512-sxf/0XYafN4AdOZP6XSLl/72gdsUox+Rtr+T1veYEEMe5ZUjQbPr1Nhl/Y0h6pQQcnUTPwiv3puVPboeF6FfNkg==",
      // ...
    },
    "lodash": {
      "version": "4.17.21",
      "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/lodash/-/lodash-4.17.21.tgz",
      "integrity": "sha512-v2kDEe57lecT37Fb5ZU1Cm+JyMAZ5I6P6g3Ztcmc5vILg0pKJ5lF6V/eGBbc3UgMHpuB/snZP3B2V10YI10F5YQ==",
      // ...
     }
    }
    }
    ```

## Dependencies

Dependencies are external packages or libraries that your project relies on to function correctly. They are mentioned in `package.json` file:

```bash
    {
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.17.1",
    "lodash": "^4.17.21"
         }
```

They are categorized into three types:

### npm Dependencies

npm dependencies are packages that your project requires for its normal operation. These packages are essential to the core functionality of your application. When someone else installs your project, npm will automatically install these dependencies for them.

### Development Dependencies (devDependencies)

Development dependencies, or devDependencies, are packages that are necessary for your project's development and testing but are not required for the production version. They include tools, testing frameworks, and other utilities used during the development process. To add in dev Dependency, follow these steps:

```bash
npm install <package-name> --save-dev
```

It will install the package name under dev Dependencies rather than depencdencies block in `package.json` file.

### Peer Dependencies (peerDependencies)

Peer dependencies are packages that your project expects the consumer (the user of your package) to install separately. These are typically packages that need to be compatible with the consumer's application, and the consumer is responsible for ensuring this compatibility.

## NPM Scripts

NPM scripts are a feature of the Node Package Manager (NPM) that allows you to define and run scripts as part of your Node.js project's workflow. These scripts are defined in your project's `package.json` file under the "scripts" section. NPM scripts provide a convenient way to automate common development tasks and streamline your project's build and maintenance process.

Here is an example:

```bash
{
  "name": "my-node-project",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "node server.js", // Start the server
    "test": "jest",            // Run tests using Jest
    "build": "webpack",        // Build the project with Webpack
    "lint": "eslint .",        // Lint code using ESLint
    "dev": "npm run start",    // Alias for starting the development server
    "prepublish": "npm run build" // Run the build script before publishing
  },
  "dependencies": {
    // Your project's runtime dependencies
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "jest": "^27.0.0",
    "webpack": "^5.0.0",
    "eslint": "^8.0.0"
    // Development dependencies for testing, building, linting, etc.
  }
}

```
Here keywords like `start`, `test`, `build`, `lint`, `dev`, `prepublish` are special keywords which have special meaning. You can check out their docs from the [Offical Site](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v9/using-npm/scripts).

## NPX 

npx is a package runner tool that comes with npm (Node Package Manager) starting from version 5.2.0. It allows you to execute commands from npm packages, either ones you've installed globally or packages you've specified as project dependencies, directly from the command line.

Here's a basic example of using npx to create a new React app without having to install Create React App globally:

```bash
npx create-react-app my-new-app
```

## NPM Cache and Purging

NPM cache is a feature of the Node Package Manager (NPM) that stores downloaded packages and package versions on your local system. It helps improve the efficiency of package installation and management by reducing the need to repeatedly download the same packages from the internet. Instead, NPM can fetch them from the local cache, which is typically faster.  By default, NPM's cache is stored in a system-specific location. On most systems, it's located in a user's home directory at `~/.npm` or `~/.npm-cache` (Linux/macOS) or `%AppData%/npm-cache`.

- Cache Management Commands: You can interact with the NPM cache using the following commands:

    - `npm cache clean`: This command removes all data from the cache.
    - `npm cache clean --force`: It is similar to npm cache clean, but it forcefully removes the cache without  prompting for confirmation.
    - `npm cache verify`: This command checks the integrity of cached data and removes any corrupted entries without clearing the entire cache.

- Purging is the process of removing specific packages or versions from the NPM cache:

    - Purging Specific Packages/Versions: While npm cache clean removes the entire cache, you may sometimes want to remove specific packages or versions from the cache. You can do this manually by deleting the relevant files or folders from the cache directory.

For example, if you want to remove a specific version of a package from the cache:

Find the package folder in your cache (usually under ~/.npm or ~/.npm-cache).
Delete the folder associated with the package version you want to remove.
Using npm cache: NPM also provides some cache-related subcommands that allow more control over cache purging. For instance:

   - `npm cache ls`: Lists the contents of the cache.
   - `npm cache verify <package>@<version>`: Verifies the integrity of a specific package in the cache and -   removes it if it's corrupted.
